README.md, before:

# OSM Express

OSM Express is an ultra-fast storage format for OpenStreetMap data that powers [Protomaps](https://protomaps.com) tools.

* **Random access:** Look up nodes, ways and relations by ID; fetch member nodes to construct geometries.
* **Spatial indexing:** Nodes are bucketed into [S2 Geometry](http://s2geometry.io) cells. Access a region by providing a cell covering; works for non-rectangles.
* **Scalable:** OSM Express works the same way for OSM data of any size, from a city-sized extract to the entire planet. Planet-scale operations work efficiently on consumer grade hardware.
* **In-place updates:** Included are scripts to download minutely replication files and apply them to an .osmx database.
* **Concurrent access:** No running server process is required. Writing updates doesn't block reader access. Multiple processes can read concurrently, operating on isolated views of the database.

## Details

OSM Express is a compact 1,500 LOC, and really a cobbling together of a few low-level libraries:

* [Libosmium](https://osmcode.org/libosmium/index.html) for the reading and writing of OSM data.
* [LMDB](https://symas.com/lmdb) for a `mmap`-based ACID key-value store with fast cursor-based iteration.
* [Cap'n Proto](https://capnproto.org) for in-memory and on-disk storage of OSM elements.
* [CRoaring](https://roaringbitmap.org) for in-memory storage of ID sets as compressed bitmaps.
* [S2 Geometry](http://s2geometry.io) for indexing of geographic coordinates.

## Usage

OSM Express is being used in production, but should still be considered experimental with an unstable API. The simplest way to use it is via the `osmx` command line program. It can also be embedded into a C++ project by including headers.

### Command line

```bash
osmx expand planet.osm.pbf planet.osmx # converts a pbf or xml to osmx. Takes 5-10 hours for the planet, resulting in a ~600GB file.
osmx extract planet.osmx extract.osm.pbf --bbox 40.7411\,-73.9937\,40.7486\,-73.9821 # extract a new pbf for the given bounding box.
osmx update planet.osmx 3648548.osc 3648548 2019-08-29T17:50:02Z --commit # applies an OsmChange diff.
osmx stat planet.osmx # Print statistics, seqnum and timestamp.
osmx query planet.osmx way 34633854 # look up an element by ID.
```

Detailed command line usage can be found in the [Manual]().

### Headers

[examples/print_wkt.cpp](examples/print_wkt.cpp) is a short, commented C++ program that uses the headers to read a way from a .osmx file and outputs its [Well-Known Text](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Well-known_text_representation_of_geometry) LineString geometry.

```bash
./print_wkt ../ny.osmx 34633854
Empire State Building	LINESTRING (-73.9864855 40.7484833,-73.9851554 40.7479226,-73.9848259 40.7483735,-73.9861526 40.7489422,-73.9863111 40.7487242,-73.9863282 40.7487007,-73.9864684 40.7485078,-73.9864855 40.7484833)
```

Detailed C++ usage can be found in the [Development Docs]().

### Other languages

TBD

## License and Development

2-Clause BSD, see [LICENSE.md](LICENSE.md). Bug reports, pull requests welcome! For support, new features, and integration, contact [hi@protomaps.com](mailto:hi@protomaps.com).

Commit message:

add bbox example, refactor cursor functions, rename main -> cmd

README.md, after:

# OSM Express

OSM Express is an ultra-fast storage format for OpenStreetMap data that powers [Protomaps](https://protomaps.com) tools.

* **Random access:** Look up nodes, ways and relations by ID; fetch member nodes to construct geometries.
* **Spatial indexing:** Nodes are bucketed into [S2 Geometry](http://s2geometry.io) cells. Access a region by providing a cell covering; works for non-rectangles.
* **Scalable:** OSM Express works the same way for OSM data of any size, from a city-sized extract to the entire planet. Planet-scale operations work efficiently on consumer grade hardware.
* **In-place updates:** Included are scripts to download minutely replication files and apply them to an .osmx database.
* **Concurrent access:** No running server process is required. Writing updates doesn't block reader access. Multiple processes can read concurrently, operating on isolated views of the database.

## Details

OSM Express is a compact 1,500 LOC, and really a cobbling together of a few low-level libraries:

* [Libosmium](https://osmcode.org/libosmium/index.html) for the reading and writing of OSM data.
* [LMDB](https://symas.com/lmdb) for a `mmap`-based ACID key-value store with fast cursor-based iteration.
* [Cap'n Proto](https://capnproto.org) for in-memory and on-disk storage of OSM elements.
* [CRoaring](https://roaringbitmap.org) for in-memory storage of ID sets as compressed bitmaps.
* [S2 Geometry](http://s2geometry.io) for indexing of geographic coordinates.

## Usage

OSM Express is being used in production, but should still be considered experimental with an unstable API. The simplest way to use it is via the `osmx` command line program. It can also be embedded into a C++ project by including headers.

### Command line

```bash
osmx expand planet.osm.pbf planet.osmx # converts a pbf or xml to osmx. Takes 5-10 hours for the planet, resulting in a ~600GB file.
osmx extract planet.osmx extract.osm.pbf --bbox 40.7411\,-73.9937\,40.7486\,-73.9821 # extract a new pbf for the given bounding box.
osmx update planet.osmx 3648548.osc 3648548 2019-08-29T17:50:02Z --commit # applies an OsmChange diff.
osmx stat planet.osmx # Print statistics, seqnum and timestamp.
osmx query planet.osmx way 34633854 # look up an element by ID.
```

Detailed command line usage can be found in the [Manual]().

### Headers

[examples/print_wkt.cpp](examples/print_wkt.cpp) is a short, commented C++ program that uses the headers to read a way from a .osmx file and outputs its [Well-Known Text](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Well-known_text_representation_of_geometry) LineString geometry.

```bash
./print_wkt ../ny.osmx 34633854
Empire State Building	LINESTRING (-73.9864855 40.7484833,-73.9851554 40.7479226,-73.9848259 40.7483735,-73.9861526 40.7489422,-73.9863111 40.7487242,-73.9863282 40.7487007,-73.9864684 40.7485078,-73.9864855 40.7484833)
```

[examples/bbox_wkt.cpp](examples/bbox_wkt.cpp) is a more complex example that takes a bounding box as input, and returns WKT LineStrings for ways that overlap the bbox. This overlap is an approximation based on cells and may include ways outside the bounding box.

Detailed C++ usage can be found in the [Development Docs]().

### Other languages

TBD

## License and Development

2-Clause BSD, see [LICENSE.md](LICENSE.md). Bug reports, pull requests welcome! For support, new features, and integration, contact [hi@protomaps.com](mailto:hi@protomaps.com).
